# Nonhuman Agency in Contemporary Ecofiction

Nonhuman, any entity that possesses human characteristics to some degree, but not enough to be considered a human, has been widely studied in the humanities and social sciences. In environmental-oriented works of fiction, namely ecofiction, nonhuman entities display agency. Many literary studies have observed nonhuman agency in environmental fiction through a qualitative method, namely close reading. However, there is a lack of quantitative approaches, such as distant reading, to nonhuman agency in fictional settings. Through a mixed method of distant reading and close reading, this study aims at identifying nonhuman agency in contemporary ecofiction. This study will contribute to both digital humanities and environmental humanities scholarship.

The corpus for this study is 75 contemporary ecofiction books. Jim Dwyer (2010)’s book, "Where the Wild Books Are: A Field Guide to Ecofiction," was used in the data collection process[^1]. There is a list of 100 best ecofiction books as an appendix in his book. Among the 100 books, I collected a total of 75 books that were available in the HathiTrust Digital Library (HathiTrust), where "the largest digitized collection of knowledge allowable by copyright law" is located[^2]. Distant reading, a digital humanities method of visualizing global features of a single or of multiple text(s), was used to generate a comprehensive view of nonhuman agency in the corpus.

All distant reading tasks were done in HathiTrust Research Center Analytics' data capsule, "a system of secure computing environments for performing researcher-driven text analysis on the HathiTrust corpus."[^2] First, syntactic parsing along with tokenization and lemmatization was done using BookNLP's part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing features. After tokens were parsed, each subject was categorized as either human or nonhuman using BookNLP's supersense tagging feature, which assists in "annotating text with the tagset defined by the 41 Wordnet supersense classes for nouns and verbs."[^3] Among the supersense tagged tokens, tokens labeled as **noun.person** went under the human category, whereas those labeled as **noun.animal** and **noun.plant** under the nonhuman category.



# References
[^1]: Dwyer, J. (2010). _Where the Wild Books Are: A Field Guide to Ecofiction_. University of Nevada Press.
[^2]: HathiTrust Digital Library. (n.d.). (https://www.hathitrust.org/). Accessed April 23, 2024.
[^3]: Jänicke, S., Franzini, G., Cheema, M. F., & Scheuermann, G. (2015). On close and distant reading in digital humanities: A survey and future challenges. In R. Borgo, F. Ganovelli, & I. Viola (Eds.), _A State-of-the-Art (STAR) Report_ (pp. 83-103). The Eurographics Association. (http://dx.doi.org/10.2312/eurovisstar.20151113)
